So let's now discuss the difference
between the this and the super key words,
in depth, we'll also find out about the
differences between the this and super
method calls, as you can see by adding
parentheses on the end. Alright, so let's
start with the super and the this key
words first. You know, the keyword super
is used to access or call the parent
class members, variables and methods.
Now the keyword this on the other hand
is used to call the current class members
variables and methods, so this is
required when we have a parameter with
the same name as an instance variable or
field. Now note that we can use both of
them anywhere in a class except in
static areas which is the static block
or a static method, any attempt to do so
there will lead to compile time errors
but don't worry too much about static
we'll be talking more about that later
in the course. So the keyword this is
commonly used with constructors and
setters and optionally used in getters,
it's particularly useful for beginners
using it in getters. Now in the example
below, we're using that this keyword in
the constructor and setter and that's
because there's a parameter with the
same name as the instance or field.
Now, in the getter we don't have any
parameters so there's no conflict so
therefore the this keyword is optional
there. Now, the keyword super is commonly
used with a method overriding when we
call a method with the same name from
the parent class. Now in the example
below, we have a method called print'
method that calls super .print method in
other words it's calling the method with
the same name from the parent class.
Now, without adding the keyword super in this
case, it would end up being a recursive
call what that means is that the method
would call itself forever or actually
until memory is fully used on your
computer. So that's why we need the super
keyword so that we can call a method
with the same name from a parent class.
Alright, so in Java we've got this this
call and the super call, so notice of
braces but it's known as a call since it
looks like a regular method call,
so you'll use this parenthesis to call a
constructor from another overloaded
constructor in the same class.
You know the call to this parentheses
can only be used in a constructor and it
must be the first statement in a
constructor. Now it's used with
constructor chaining, in other words when
one constructor calls another
constructor and it helps to reduce
duplicated code. Now the only way to call
a parent constructor is by calling super
parentheses so that actually calls the
parent constructor. So the Java compiler
puts a default called as super
parentheses if we don't add it and it's
always a call to the no argument super
which is inserted by the compiler,
in other words a call to the constructor
that hasn't got any arguments and keep
in mind that the call to super
parentheses must be the first statement
in each constructor. Now even abstract
classes have constructors, although you
can never instantiate an abstract class
using the new keyword, an abstract class
by the way is still a superclass so its
constructors run when someone makes an
instance of a concrete class. We will be
talking a lot more about abstract
classes later in the in the course,
I'm just mentioning here now
to be complete and importantly a
constructor can have a call to super
parenthesis or this parenthesis but it
can have both. Alright, so let's look at
an example what I would consider a bad
constructor example, so here you can see
we've got three constructors there all
three constructors initialized variables
but there's repeated code in each
constructor as you can see there,
so we're initializing variables in each of
the constructors with some default
values, then you should never write
constructors like this, instead you
should look at doing it another way,
so let's have a look at how to do that
by using that this parenthesis call, so
this example it's very similar to the
example on the previous page, but the
difference is that the first constructor
calls the second constructor, the second
constructor calls the third construct
and then the third constructor actually
does the initialization of the instance
variables. So in other words the third
constructor is doing all the work here.
So now that we've done this no matter
what constructor we call, the variables
will always be initialized in the third
constructor and only there, so this is
known as constructor chaining and what
we're doing is we're giving the last
constructor the responsibility to do the
actual initialization of the instance variables.
Alright, so looking at both examples on
screen now, so on the left-hand side
again this is the bad example of
constructors, on the right hand side
we've got a good example. So again the
problem with the left hand side is the
duplicated code, so as you can see all
three constructors on the left hand side
are initializing the variables, contrast
that to the solution on the right hand
side, so there we've got one constructor
that initializes variables and the other
constructors are just calling each other
so that ultimately we end up in the
third constructor and that's again the
constructor chaining so with that
constructor chaining, we can and do avoid
code duplication and by the way
duplicated code can lead to many bugs
and a lot more work on your behalf and
it's also bad practice as a rule to
write duplicate code which of course we
did in the bad example. Alright, let's
have a quick look at the super
parentheses call example, so in this
example, we've got a class shape with X Y
variables instance variables and the
class rectangle that extends shape with
variables width and height, so in the
rectangle class, the first constructor is
calling the second constructor, now the
second constructor is calling the parent
constructor with parameters x and y.
Now, the parent constructor will initialize
the X Y variables while the second
rectangle constructor will initialize
the width and height variables, so as you
can see in this code, we've got both the
super parenthesis and this parenthesis
calls. Now you may want to watch this
video a few times or you may also want
to then continue through to the rest of
this section and then come back to this
one to see if that actually makes sense.
It's very important as a Java
developer to understand the differences
with these calls to be able to use them
properly. Alright, so let's move on now
to the next video.